The starting point for any UBI must be the status quo. How are existing programs faring in helping the poorest?     
The first striking fact is the sheer
number of schemes and programs run by
the government. The Budget for 2016-17
indicates that there are about 950 central
sector and centrally sponsored sub-schemes
in India accounting for about 5 percent
of the GDP by budget allocation
Even leaving aside their effectiveness,
considerable gains could be achieved in terms
of bureaucratic costs and time by replacing
many of these schemes with a UBI.
districts
Consider the evidence on misallocation
of the government’s resources. Misallocation
captures the fact that the poorest areas of
the country often obtain a lower share of
government resources when compared to
their richer counterparts.
One major explanation for
misallocation is state capacity – resources
allocated to districts are often a function of
the district’s ability to spend them; richer
districts have better administrative capacities
to effectively implement schemes.
If a state or
a district with more poor is allocated very
little resources, then it is almost certain
that some deserving households would be
excluded 9 .
Misallocation to districts with less poor:
The UBI, by design, should effectively tackle
issues related to misallocation. As envisaged
in this chapter, a UBI will simply amount
to a transfer of resources from above 15 and
need not be “accessed” by beneficiaries 16 .
The simplicity of the process cannot be
overstated: beneficiaries are simply required
to withdraw money from their accounts
as and when they please, without having
to jump through bureaucratic hoops. The
simplicity of the process also implies that the
success of a UBI hinges much less on local
bureaucratic ability than do other schemes.
9.26 Exclusion error: Given the link between
misallocation and exclusion errors, a UBI
that improves allocation of resources should
mechanically bring down exclusion error.
Furthermore, by virtue of being universal,
exclusion errors under the UBI should be
lower than existing targeted schemes (for
reasons listed previously – see Box 1) 18 .
Poor households (in fact even many
of those above poverty) are often faced with
idiosyncratic shocks such as bad health and
job loss, and covariate or aggregate shocks
such as natural disasters and political risk.
Jha, Nagarajan and Pradhan (2012) show
that slightly more than 50 percent of rural
households across India face one or more
forms of shock, with the most prominent
being aggregate shocks (crop loss, water
borne diseases, loss of property, cyclones,
drought, etc.). In their data, about 60 percent
of individuals use personal savings to cope
with these shocks. Government assistance
comes a distant second with only close to
10 percent of individuals accessing it. The
third most prominent option, at 6 percent,
is borrowing from friends.
The World Development
Report (2015) argues that individuals living
in poverty have (a) a preoccupation with
daily hassles and this results in a depletion of
cognitive resources required for important
decisions; (b) low self-image that tends to
blunt aspirations; (c) norms that may require
investments in social capital to the detriment
of private opportunities.
Mani and others (2013) showed that pre-
harvest cash-strapped sugarcane farmers in
Tamil Nadu performed worse in a series of
cognitive tests (including 10 points lower on
an IQ test) than they did after harvest, when
they were likely to have very little loans and
were cash-rich
Improved Fnancial Inclusion
Increasingly, banks have been making use of
BCs to provide last mile access to banking.
A Taskforce on an Aadhaar-Enabled Unified
Payment Infrastructure recommended
increasing commissions to BCs in order
to make them profitable. This profitability
is highly dependent on the volume of
transactions per BC, and one can model
scenarios where a UBI can lead to increased
financial inclusion through an increased
number of transactions. A very plausible
hypothesis is that as a UBI is provided to
individuals, there will be an endogenous
increase in the volume of transactions and
revenue from government transfers along
with a corresponding decrease in per unit
fixed costs, thereby increasing the profitability
of BCs and expanding their coverage.
onstraints in the form of a higher
income. Using recently released data for
farmers from the Debt and Investment
Survey (2013), it is evident that as one
moves along the consumption spectrum, the
proportion of farmers taking informal loans
falls and formal loans take over (Figure 6).
While the trend in proportion of farmers
as well as average loan sizes is smooth
across percentiles, the trend in median loan
amounts shows a discontinuity at the 78th
percentile – from median loans being zero till
this level, there is sudden increase in median
amounts for formal loans(Figure 7). Such
a discontinuity implies that if everybody’s
consumptions could be increased to this
level, there might be significant jump in
access to formal credit.
Detractors of UBI argue that, as a cash
transfer programme, this policy will promote
conspicuous spending or spending on social
evils such as alcohol, tobacco.
The main finding
is that these goods form a smaller share
of overall budget/consumption as overall
consumption increases (Figure 9).
nner in reality.
9.42 Banerjee, Hanna, Kreindler and
Olken (2015) conduct a meta-analysis of 7
randomized controlled trials of government
cash transfer programs in 6 developing
countries (Honduras, Morocco, Mexico,
Philippines, Indonesia and Nicaragua).
Appendix 4 provides a summary of these
studies from the paper. Most of these are
conditional cash transfer type of programs
and form between 4 percent (Honduras)
and 20 percent (Morocco) of household
consumption. They find no significant
reduction in labour supply (inside and outside
the household) for men or women from the
provision of cash transfers.
Appendix 3 provides evidence on a similar non-impact
of UBI onlabour supply from a modified
randomized control trial conducted in a few
villages in Madhya Pradesh, India.

